We're talking to Curt Monaghan.
Congratulations.
Is this really your last book?
Yeah, I think so, Curt.
I mean, are you tired of writing?
Well, I've said I'm completely put.
You know, if my books had all disappeared and never been read and everything, I'd still be waving my hand and saying, hey, hey, hey, hey.
My publishing history has been most enjoyable.
I continue to say everything I ever wanted to say.
And, for sure, this is, you know, if I could be, I've been straining all my life to communicate something, but I can communicate it all, you know, the messages I've got through.
Do you think this has something to do with the difficulty you have with this novel, or is it... Well, what a...
It took me a while to figure out what it should be, which was the last chapter in one big book, rather than a freestanding piece of work.
But also, I didn't like the story.
It wasn't my kind of story.
I wasn't that interested.
So why not chuck it?
I did.
But, I mean, it took you ten years, though, to chuck it.
Wasn't there a point along the way when you said, this isn't working?
Of course it did.
No, it was acceptable.
It was finished, and it was in the catalog.
It was in the Putnam catalog.
Really?
I didn't know that.
And I said, I don't like it.
So I started all over again and made it.
I love this.
Well, it's a nice coda.
Now, what the hell?
It's how many authors lived to be 75 and get to look back at everything they did, you know?
Looking back at it now, where it is a body of work that's discreet, I mean, it's now, it has boundaries.
Do you see it as a corpus?
Do you see this body of work as a definable corpus?
Yes, I see it as organic with my life.
It could have been quite separate, you know, as I could have, well, I could have written a bunch of detective stories or whatever, which would have been little gems, you know, but quite separate from that.
turns out, in retrospect, to be quite personal.
Do you think that it's necessary to, if then, I mean, I know it sounds like a dumb question, but to truly understand you that we do have to read the body of work?
Yes.
If this book will make no sense to people, then I've read at least one other book of mine.
And perhaps even all of them.
You know, the mail I get, the first line is, often is, I've read everything you've ever read.
Is that the most satisfying thing?
Oh, it's very nice to hear.
I mean, it's an accident.
You can't create that.
You can't make it happen.
I was out in San Francisco a couple of weeks ago.
I'm working at a new book, and I had a interview with Chili Olson, who was quite an interesting woman.
And she knew I was coming, so she got my book from the library.
And I was so pleased to open it up, and there's the card.
to see that that copy has been checked out 32 times.
I took a photograph of it.
Yeah, of course you did.
That means more to me than 32 sales, I think.
Well, it's with a book.
I mean, with a movie, you know, exactly how many people saw it.
But with a book, you have no idea how many people have read it.
It's indestructible, too.
It's Twitter, but... One time over there.
Down the Virgin Islands, the American Virgin Islands, I guess.
And papers were blown by, pages out of the book.
And I started chasing it, and it all piled up against the shrubs.
And it was a memoir by André Gide that I'd never read before.
In Christ, I was able to gather up.
this book and publish it myself there on the beach.
Did you start reading it?
Oh, yeah.
I mean, I had to read it.
I would find out what it was.
The whole thing wasn't there, but what I did read was quite interesting.
And it was fun chasing the pages.
I might use that, you know.
I'm writing a new book on this whole concept of book culture, and the eve of the new millennium, and where libraries are going, books, not only as objects, but
Do you despair about the future of literature?
Do you share with how it goes?
Well, no.
Styron's been quite sane on the subject.
You know, other people have good ideas, too.
And he said that, you know, the great Russian novels were written for a very small audience because, you know, this was a barbarous nation.
You know, a high degree of illiteracy and all that.
And that was enough.
So, actually, you know, we're all money-crazy and fame-crazy now, and have to go nationwide and all that.
And, you know, there's a small audience.
There's an audience, and ought to be respected as such, and enjoy this such.
Philip Roth has said, not to me, but just quoted by Harold Bloom, who I interviewed for this new book.
that he believes that there were only perhaps 50,000 serious readers in the United States and about the world.
I'm not asking you to comment on that number, but I think you're basically saying something.
There really aren't that many people who read seriously.
Well, what I've said is that, you know, the Jeffersonian dream of a literate electorate is crazy.
It's like expecting everybody to play the French one.
Because it's hard to do, to read.
And so, well, what Slaughterhouse-Five was taught in high school is very common.
And, you know, these kids are having trouble already.
And then the story isn't sequential.
You know, it was all of a sudden 20 years ago.
It was, hey, come on, give me a break, you know, paying attention to it.
Or irony, where you say one thing and mean another.
Oh, come on.
You know, you say straight out in this book that Kilburg is your alter ego.
Explain to me what an alter ego is to you.
Well, in this case, he is a science fiction writer.
I might have been.
Because some people get hooked on that, you know, and they're really pretty good writers.
from time to time, Ted Sturgeon and, well, Isaac Asimov, a genius.
You know, a book I'm reading right now, which I've never read before, is called A Canticle Filippowitz.
Yes.
It's just brought in a new paperback.
Yeah.
It's magnificent.
Who's the author?
Well, it's a guy well-known for science fiction.
Yeah, he's only written that one book and another book, well, that appears to be posthumous.
It doesn't say it, but it says the state of... Yeah, I remember it.
I remember it kind of go for you.
Yeah.
Well, there are those marvelous one-shots, and I had... I taught an Iowa writer's workshop for two years, 65 and 66.
I'll place this story in Des Moines, by the way, if you thought along right now.
Oh.
All right, but I...
Well, among my students was John Irving, who's done it reasonably well since.
Okay.
And Keir Godwin and John Casey, who won National Book Award.
And Andres de Buys, local boy.
Local man.
These people were all maturing to them.
They had non-fets, draft dodgers, all kinds of people during the 60s.
And they'd had love affairs and had their hearts broken in one thing or another, and I'd had kids, some of them, and all that, so they really had a lot to write about, and an interesting bunch.
But I had them, at one point, go to the Iowa City Public Library and find novels that hadn't been taken out for years, and see whether they're any good or not.
I'm writing about that.
I start my new book with a prologue where I go to the Boston Athenaeum, and I'm looking for a book that was published in 1911, the catalog with Samuel Pepys's library, which I needed.
And I get it, and as I'm checking it out, I'm the first person to take it out in 84 years.
You can tell.
And I say,
something really stupid, like, gee, who did they buy this book for anyway?
And the man says, he says, who bought it for you, sir?
And he is amusing, and it's beautiful.
But that's very interesting, you see, books, even if they aren't read, does that mean that they're not relevant anyway?
Well, yes, I had a, since my education was technical, and my academic education was technical, that there are, you know, first chemistry and then anthropology, which
Because I was dependent on my liberal arts friends to work to read.
And here I am, as I'll soon be 75, and had my block knocked off by a book I had never thought of.
Maybe I've heard about it and not given a damn, just a month ago.
And a friend said, you know, I just read your book.
He's got an advanced copy of this.
He said, you are a clone of Erasmus of Rotterdam.
Wow.
And so he loaned me his copy of, uh, In Prose of Fallen.
Jesus Christ, he was wrote.
And I had, you know, Erasmus of Rotterdam had some PhD in, you know, this kind of thing.
The world's first professional writer.
Did you know that?
No.
He made money?
Yeah.
He did it mindfully to make money.
But he was very interesting, because he was a translator of different words of the Bible and all that, and a great biblical scholar.
And he didn't dare.
You can't detect that he's a skeptic about Christianity and about Holy Scripture.
But one thing he does do as a scholar, and with his service I certainly welcome, was saying that the Trinity is a fraud.
Because there's no justification for whatsoever in Scripture.
And, of course, it was.
interpolated, uh, many years later by, uh, I took balls.
But then I read, and I'm a skeptic, of course, a racist and atheist, and by good people who are atheists, but I, uh, was reading in, uh,
I've been talking too much and thinking too much.
Who are the couple who did the wonderful historical series?
Ken Bernstein?
No.
No, this is a book.
Will Durant and Ariel Durant.
Will and Ariel Durant in their book on the Middle Ages.
They were outspoken skeptics, but they were upper class.
Very scraped, isn't it?
Yeah.
But their families protected them from any sort of punishment where other people were getting burned at the stake.
Galileo had to apologize for something.
Yeah.
He said, but it still does move around.
It still does move around.
Well, don't show me the torture instrument and I apologize for anything.
Copernicus, you know, that great book.
There was a fellow over here at Harvard by the name of Owen Gingrich, who has actually got out and found every surviving first and second edition copy of Copernicus in the world, writing about it.
Because he had heard someplace that this was the greatest book never read.
But he was going to see if there were annotations.
And he's found enormous annotations.
So that's formed.
People did read Copernicus and did respond to it again.
I wonder how intelligent the responses were.
Well, it changed the world.
I don't think he's evaluating it.
He might be.
He's still working on bibliography, but he wrote a book called The Great Copernicus Chase.
Tell me, are you an author who believes that completed work is completed work?
You know, like Henry James, when he went to write the prefaces to his novels, he wound up going in and fooling around with the novels and changing them.
Is there anything with your body of work that you go back and tinker with?
Well, there are mistakes.
I mean, just technical mistakes.
Beyond that, but more substantive things.
When I teach, I haven't done it for a while, but I taught over here one year and again at Iowa and at City College.
I said,
that whatever you write in a short story or a novel or a play has to be like an egg.
It's absolutely everything necessary to life.
It's inside that shell.
And to have a wholeness in that.
And then this last book, I realized that the shell includes the whole of my last work, not such as this.
You mentioned that Trump is your alter ego, and you talk about cynicism.
And Mark Twain, as well, who didn't live to see World War I, but who said, screw it anyway.
Do you feel this way, or is this your... Well, I think, what I'm talking about is, I think, people don't like life very much, and we have reason not to like it.
humanity very much, and we seem to be a part of it because there are extraordinary events like the Holocaust.
You know, and I've said two, I haven't ever written it, but maybe I have, about Dr. Strangelove.
So what people particularly liked, I mean, nobody commented on it,
because we're all going to live together, live together.
And, you know, I think it was a doomsday device, but a beautiful cloud.
Sort of like a quick cream on a marshmallow sundae or something.
We'll meet again, don't know where, don't know where.
That's a brilliant movie.
I don't know.
There's an awful lot.
I hated this Marv Albert thing so much.
Isn't that terrible?
That this can be done to a person?
I have no idea.
Why didn't he pay her off?
That's what I'd like to know, if you don't say.
Well, but... Apparently, he did do something there, which should be ashamed, but... It's not the public's right to know about it.
It's unbelievable.
Well, we entertain ourselves, you see.
Oh, and it goes on, in other words.
You see any of the talk shows and the quotes and this stuff.
Yeah, but then we get, oh, look, this fraudulent contract drawn up for Marilyn Monroe, where she would not.
St.
Grish.
And this is one of our great reporters, I thought.
Yeah, Pulitzer Prize winner.
And why the hell would a man of that seeming quality publish such a book?
Yeah.
There have been some really good books about the Kennedys.
I don't think there need to be any more, except that you can sell a book with the name of it.
Unless you're going to tell me something we don't already know.
Well, I want to know what the fuck happened to Chaputty.
Excuse me this morning.
I've got to tell you, I love that line where your father is going through the red light and he says, so shoot me.
My father, who's 86, the death is a stone, two years ago was driving a little BMW and stopped and got hit by a train by 16 boxcars.
And he survived.
The thing was just enough over the thing and he kept his feet on his foot.
He couldn't even, well, finally when the train stopped and the car was still running and his foot was frozen to the,
to the break, and he actually literally had to try him out.
And then they're going to charge him for, you know, this and that.
And he didn't say, so shoot me, but his reaction was, hey, I'm 85 years old.
You know, throw me in jail.
What are you going to do?
It's wonderful, wonderful, so shoot me, he says.
And in your instance, he'd already lost a loved one.
You know, it's a wonderful, wonderful, wonderful thing.
You know, one of your reviewers, I don't know which and whom, but talks about it.
This is a clever way to do a novel as memoir, memoir as novel.
If you were to categorize this book, give it a genre, what would you call it?
It's not my problem.
It's my problem.
No, it's not even your problem.
I think it's some kind of wordplay that I've, go ahead.
I spoke at Ohio Wesleyan three nights ago.
And one person said, you know, a couple of people have called you a postmodernist.
Do you accept this?
And I didn't have a clue.
And, you know, I said it's like the character in Mollier who was delighted to find out he was writing the prose.
He hadn't realized it.
Do you know what?
Can you explain to my satisfaction what a postmodernist is?
But that phrase has been so... Well, I'll tell you that I was born when I was in 1922.
I was fortunate to have writers ahead of me about, you know, 20 years old who were breaking all sorts of grounds with really good political thinking.
Right.
It does pass up.
Steinbeck and Rick Caldwell and so forth.
It's interesting you're naming all American writers here.
Very interesting.
Is this your compass?
I guess your fictional compass?
It's the people from New York.
I guess Boston.
Face of Europe.
My center of gravity.
And we don't look across the Atlantic.
We don't look across any other
But, I think the leading edge stuff was happening here, though, in many respects.
If you throw up James Joyce in 1922 or 1924.
Yeah, no, well, even so.
Yeah, I'll go ahead.
See if they're driving.
And I'll tell you, the book is really not in my block off.
You know, when I say my friends indicate to me, I grew up in a half full of books that nobody had read.
There were people who bought books and never would read them.
They were uncut pages.
But the Scooter River Anthology, it was quite a different foot in the west.
But also, out there, the Civil War,
It's part of the American passion.
And in New York, it's not.
Chris, they didn't fight the civil war out there, so maybe that's why it's folk war out that way.
No, they fought it, of course.
They did terrible casualties.
In the Midwest?
Well, I'm sure.
Heavy casualties in Gettysburg and everywhere else.
Okay, well, that's Pennsylvania, but I'm sure that's the Midwest.
No, the Indiana people, don't you?
The Indiana.
What the hell are the Maine people doing in Gettysburg?
Pennsylvania?
Well, they got marched there.
That's right.
Is Slaughterhouse-Fakery the defining novel, the defining work?
It was reviewed on the front page of the New York Times, and I had been ignored up to then.
Cat's Cradle was never reviewed.
Well, the night was never reviewed.
Fire in the Titan was never reviewed.
I read all of these, by the way, one after the other, when I was on an aircraft carrier in the Pacific during Vietnam in the 60s, and we had them, and we read them, and then the books that you're mentioning right now, one after the other, and read them in the body, and I did not know that these other books... So you were, as far as the Times was concerned, an unknown writer up to the arrival of them.
No, I was operating in a negligible zone, supposedly, with science fiction for...
because they weren't reading me.
They were the person who was a big time critic for the Times or Newsweek or Time Magazine or New York Review of Books had enough to read already without, you know, investigating detective stories and teenage novels and all that shit.
Because, you know, it's a tough job they've got, it's a kind of a mighty amount of material they have to practice about the process.
And so, they were relieved.
But interestingly enough, Penn, the American Writers' Organization, is self-perpetuatingly a membership committee of mid-term people, and members nominate other people.
No science fiction writers and no detectives doing that.
They're not serious.
Still to this day?
It may have changed some, but I know it.
I was really amazed when they realized that back when we were host to an international congress, which was, what, 20 years ago?
They invited me in on the script with my own book, which is nice.
Well, I think they loosened up after that.
Well, for one thing, anything
and its headquarters in New York, because guess what?
The New York Club.
That's it.
I love it when they send you the stuff and bring you down to the meetings in New York.
The issues are totally just, those are the things you... Well, Boston does have a... Yeah, it does.
That chapter, and Justin Kaplan, and... Jim Carroll.
Yeah.
Good guy, James Carroll.
Yes, well, right.
I don't have to think up too much of your time.
I do love the...
a person's living and dead are purely coincidental, I have to say.
And also the fact that you do dedicate the book to Simo Alaric is quite an interesting way.
I just mentioned him briefly.
One of the least appreciated editors, I think, today.
Well, he was at the Atlantic for a long time, but he had his office there on the edge of the garden.
I used to visit him there, and he used to lunch every day at the Ritz.
He drank a lot of the Harry's.
He picked up a group of us, which I guess were defined by our audience.
Yeah, we had the same audience.
Sometimes I was interested in being me and Richard Browdy.
All of us who worked, we thought we were doing the same people by any people.
But, yeah, I miss that.
He saved my life.
I would have been doing so much for a living.
I would have had to go into business somehow.
I have a comment of your kid that your father was a famous.
He was selling cars, I don't remember, an operator.
Sure.
I was working for it.
industrial ad agency up here.
It was like, you get that kind of job, because I've done it for General Electric years ago.
And, uh, it was Thomas Churrup.
And I just, they were so goddamn stingy.
I said, all right, I've got balls enough to win the business, too.
Uh, this car carrier went by with all those little Easter eggs on them.
The VWs were very hot.
People were crazy about little cars.
I followed this thing into a garage that was happening there where the app agency was.
I don't know.
Asked what the hell they were.
And, uh, the temporary headquarters, you know, on the weekend, I went down there and asked if I could be a dealer.
And, uh, boy, I, you know, I said that I was very lucky being
taking advertising and jobs or PR jobs or whatever, when things were bad.
I'd never had a contemptible account, you know.
I'd never represented a dictator or a product.
It was lousy.
But then I was desperately trying to sell sobs, and it was an awful time.
I had one.
He died on me.
I hate that son of a bitch.
I hate that in California.
I saw it.
You had to mix oil with the gas.
It was like a lawnmower.
Yeah.
And it was like a light bulb.
It would be working one day, and the next day it would be gone.
Well, I'm glad you didn't kill the dealer.
He's probably a friend of mine.
I don't know.
It was San Francisco.
I mean, it was terrible.
But the guys who bought them was the Air Force Base there on the Cape.
Otis.
Yeah, Otis.
And those guys are crazy about machinery.
And he could drive—listen.
Don't crabble about the job.
It could drag a VW to stoplight.
If you explore it, leave it.
And if you had changed your spark plugs recently.
So let me tell you, are you going to hear from Kilgore now, or is he now safely retired?
I'll retire.
So what are you going to do with that?
Well, I make pictures.
I write letters.
I write a lot of letters.
I write short little stuff.
I write short little stuff about the NYC, you know.
I keep busy, farting around.
Some people have no gift for farting around.
I do.
Make a day disappear.
I see how I can change that verb in my piece here.
I promised Michael I wouldn't take off too much of your time.
It's been very pleasant.
I don't like so well.
I'm glad to know you, and I want to look for your book.
That's charming that you find out how I've been taking off.
Well, the title of my book is A Gentle Madness.
I didn't know this, but up until Slaughterhouse-Five, you hadn't been reviewed.
So I asked you if that was the defining... What was there about that book that finally persuaded them that you should be, that you demanded attention?
Well, Sam Lodge would be part of it.
Oh, sorry, what is it?
Sam Lodge, who was hanging out at the Century Club in one place or another, and at the Harvard Club and all that.
I was all excited about it.
And people who read it were finally persuaded to take a look at it.
You remember the ones that hurt, don't you?
Well, your book would be attacked.
No, I got a bad review on Publishers Weekly, of all kinds of things.
I had a guy in L.A.
There was a copy editor from Variety, I mean, some dead-end son of a bitch, and said it was, you know, whatever it was.
I could quote it, but there's no need to.
Yeah, I got a couple of bad ones, and most of them were really good, but you do remember the ones that wound.
Some people don't get joked, or they think if you make jokes that you're not a serious person.
I mean, I can't help it.
It's hard to do, actually.
It's a nice skill to have.
It's to be funny.
Is it hard to be funny?
Not for me, but it is for most people.
Well, Herbert talked a little about it.
He wrote some good essays on humor and everything, but he talked about The Scarlet Letter.
The author missed the opportunity to see the comedy, putting on this big letter A every day.
I would have started playing with that idea.
You don't ask you to do it.
Nobody else is asking you to do this.
Say hi right there on that memo.
Because it's a memo with your name on it.
Makes us a unique poem.
I really do.
It was the business story of the century.
In two years, I only lost $35,000.
Wow.
That's not bad.
That's okay.
I'm all set, Michael.
I told you I'd do it in half an hour.
That's great.
Once again, three years, okay?
Yeah.
Well, it's about how nice nonsense makes life for us.
You know, he's fed up with all these theologians and taking translators that he's working with and everything, and please don't be so serious.
And what Paul Engle, founder of the Writers' Workshop out there in Iowa, he said, if we ever got a building, the Writers' Workshop ever got a building, we did.
But over the doorway, he was going to write, don't take yourself so seriously.
is the kicker to my story.
You know what the kicker is?
The way you end it.
I know what my lead is, now I've got my kicker.